Newsletter for May 2022 (#1712)
writethedocs/www: docs/blog/newsletter-may-2022.rst

And with that, let's see what we've learnt on Slack during April!

-------------------
Link-checking tools
-------------------

This month, a question about useful tools for checking links in HTML output prompted several suggestions. Some have built custom link-checking tools, but there are plenty of ready-to-use open-source options too. Here's the roundup:

* `htmltest <https://github.com/wjdp/htmltest>`_ was most suggested, based on fast performance and configurability. htmltest is also especially suitable for link testing in continuous integration environments -- you can check links in HTML files in a folder, with no need to run a web server.

> - `Muffet <https://github.com/raviqqe/muffet>`_ is another fast and thorough link-checking tool, with pretty-printed or JSON output. There's also a GitHub Action that uses Muffet, `My Broken Link Checker <https://github.com/ruzickap/action-my-broken-link-checker>`_, although you may have to adjust Muffet's maximum requests per second to accommodate GitHub rate limits.
> - `HTMLProofer <https://github.com/gjtorikian/html-proofer>`_ validates all HTML output, including internal and external links, image references and alt tags, and scripts. You can run HTMLProofer on one file, a directory, and arrays of directories and links, and it's also highly configurable.
> - `LinkChecker <https://github.com/linkchecker/linkchecker/>`_ gets the job done, and it's documented! Find detailed information and configuration options at the `LinkChecker documentation site <https://linkchecker.github.io/linkchecker/index.html>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Muffet <https://github.com/raviqqe/muffet>`_ is another fast and thorough link-checking tool, with pretty-printed or JSON output. There's also a GitHub Action that uses Muffet, `My Broken Link Checker <https://github.com/ruzickap/action-my-broken-link-checker>`_, although you may have to adjust Muffet's maximum requests per second to accommodate GitHub rate limits.
* `HTMLProofer <https://github.com/gjtorikian/html-proofer>`_ validates all HTML output, including internal and external links, image references and alt tags, and scripts. You can run HTMLProofer on one file, a directory, and arrays of directories and links, and it's also highly configurable.
* `LinkChecker <https://github.com/linkchecker/linkchecker/>`_ gets the job done, and it's documented! Find detailed information and configuration options at the `LinkChecker documentation site <https://linkchecker.github.io/linkchecker/index.html>`_.
```

At least, I think that's what the warning is about, but I'm no expert on the syntax :shrug:

* Most assume that programmer writers have experience as software developers, and then move to focus on documentation (likely for other developers). API docs are more often associated with the work of programmer writers, together with associated code samples.

* A related role is "developer advocate", or "developer evangelist". These roles have the added responsibility of engaging with developer communities, through social media and online forums.

* Several people associated the title "programmer writer" with AWS/Amazon or with Microsoft. And one seasoned programmer writer let us know that this particular title was in fact coined by Microsoft many years ago, and was part of a continuum that included "consumer writer" and "technical writer". The distinctions reflected not only degrees of technical/coding expertise, but also differences in audience: programmer writers wrote for developers, technical writers for other technical audiences (eg system administrators), and consumer writers for "all of humanity". But that level of distinction belonged to the time when Microsoft employed more than 1800 writers (!!)

------------------------------------------------------

> Is written content outdated - and it's time for video?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Is written content outdated - and is it time for video?
```

------------------------------------------------------

In the world outside technical writing, video has become hugely popular; but most documentation is still in written form. Is written content outdated? Is it time to pivot to video? Obviously, the question about it this month provoked major debate.

> Those in opposition to video say the main problems are the inaccessibility of video content: they're not searchable, so users cannot quickly browse the video to find what they need. Another issue is the ineffectiveness of video interface controls, which prevents users from adjusting the video to their liking, such as by slowing down the speed or pausing in exactly the right place. Plus there are the  business problems. Efforts to create videos may be considered too labor-intensive or may be disrupted if resources are limited, as videos require specialized skills that can be costly to employ.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Those in opposition to video say the main problems are the inaccessibility of video content: videos aren't searchable, so users cannot quickly browse the video to find what they need. Another issue is the ineffectiveness of video interface controls, which prevents users from adjusting the video to their liking, such as by slowing down the speed or pausing in exactly the right place. Plus, videos can present business problems. Efforts to create videos may be considered too labor-intensive or may be disrupted if resources are limited, as videos require specialized skills that can be costly to employ.
```

It's crucial to recognize when video content is valuable and when it is not; it comes back to the key goals of documentation, delivering value to users and facilitating understanding. None of the participants felt that video content could completely replace written content - but it can certainly be used to supplement it.

-----------------------------------
Templates for concept documentation
-----------------------------------

Most of us have written concept or explanatory documentation at some point. But unlike procedures, which are easier to formalize, concept docs can vary hugely in form - it all depends on the ideas you're trying to explain. So is it possible to have a template for concept docs?

One community member suggested a rough outline:

- Present the context and the `learning objective <https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/social-sciences/learning-objective>`__ for the page.
- Start with an overview of the concept and problem space - something like a Wikipedia-style `lead section <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Lead_section>`__.
- Break down the concept into smaller pieces, and explain those in turn.
- Anchor each explanation with examples.

> - Link to action oriented content - what a reader can do with their new understanding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Link to action-oriented content - what a reader can do with their new understanding.
```

> But it's hard to be much more prescriptive than this, because the form of an explanation article depends strongly on its scope. And figuring out the scope is a fundamental part of the challenge. It should be grounded in **who** is going to read it and **for what**. You'll need to draw the boundaries around the domain, and then explain both what's inside, but also the key relationships to the things outside.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But it's hard to be much more prescriptive than this, because the form of an explanation article depends strongly on its scope. And figuring out the scope is a fundamental part of the challenge. It should be grounded in **who** is going to read it and **for what**. You'll need to draw the boundaries around the domain, and then explain both what's inside as well as the key relationships to the things outside.
```

So the answer is: we haven't yet figured out a detailed template. Sorry! But for the meantime, there are some more lightweight outlines: 

* `Concept template with guidance <https://docs.google.com/document/d/17PJ6kOazLiLSl0465sZcUbujh_g9_g6WKOv1IcxQDPs/edit#>`__ (Google doc) 
* `Concept template <https://github.com/platformsh/platformsh-docs/blob/main/docs/templates/concept.md>`__ (GitHub file)
* `Good Docs project template <https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/templates/blob/dev/explanation/template-explanation.adoc>`__, with `guidance <https://github.com/thegooddocsproject/templates/blob/dev/explanation/about-explanation.md>`__ (GitHub files)

------------------
What we’re reading
------------------

The #bipoc group’s been discussing the following materials on diversity, inclusion, and equity. Want to join the conversation? Please join us in the `#bipoc Slack channel <https://writethedocs.slack.com/archives/C016STMEWJD>`_!

A short read: Employees are calling for more salary transparency. HR Advisory shares how `being more transparent with salary increases equity <https://www.hradvisory.com/blog/increase-transparency-and-equity-with-salary-ranges>`_.

> A short read: Axios reports that in the United States, `the government is making an effort to address equity <https://www.axios.com/biden-administration-equity-plan-29a81cd8-bbf7-4e61-8682-4cdb68a1c524.html>`__. You can `read more about this effort <https://www.whitehouse.gov/equity/>`__ on the official Whitehouse site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A short read: Axios reports that in the United States, `the government is making an effort to address equity <https://www.axios.com/biden-administration-equity-plan-29a81cd8-bbf7-4e61-8682-4cdb68a1c524.html>`__. You can `read more about this effort <https://www.whitehouse.gov/equity/>`__ on the official White House site.
```
